40:00

And we were doing it at ah-, Ive don it wohtin a number of places and () Sand iego university which is a catholic university
uhum
So, we had rehearsed already with the prchesra and then he told me
yeah when you get to the churhc just bring it in and put it in the center of the church (laughs), center of the altar!
said ok, so i came up with the drum put this in the altar and then I, you know, i go tot he green room to change, you know, and he's like 
"wht did i tellyou what happen?"" laughs
i go "No I would have"
he goes "they didnt wanna allow the drummer to church"
500 years later, im taling 10 years ago, because it's pagan, 
Wow
Because of what she's talking about
YEah
We can't allow
is it a-, a church does lie kind of like mexi-, mexican
The chapo! Achap!
Yeah, so they recognize the simolism- 
Oh yeah! 
maybe it-
YEah yeah but it's like "we cant let a pagan drum in the church"
So, he's like-, he's (laughs)
(41:00)
But he didn't tell me that! until im tere, I didnt even know and when i put the drum right in the middle of the altar
he's just
JEJE
He goes "put it right there!"
no you dont do that, 
Coughs
And I did it and then I went to the green room
you can put it aside but not in the center, center is-, is
So then hes like, hes like "Oh man! I was here for  weeks, we were arguing with these (), ,you know, and finally the bishop, but, you know, we'd be at one side of the table (laughs) the., arguing the bishop so they end and finally he raise his hand and said "The drums gonna be used, not () here anymore but this from anyone sitting at this table" and thats why he said "put the drum in the middle when i cae in" so I had no idea util he told me after (laughs)
(laughs)
He told me before we played but he didnt tell me
yeah
so, but  it's been 500 years
you know this is 2019, its 500 years so its just you know
the its the-, the-, the coincidence of time is just like really? really after all this time? still this is like this this?
And then I always go to-, whenever i hear this, cause i hear this form many people is like "the inquisiton is 300 years before and 200 years after" theyre urning people alive at the stake so when i hear abou the sacrifices and when i hear about ah- executions,ah- nwhen i hear about this ah, somebody and i cant remember his name, but I-, this guy perspetive was "if you look at capital punishment in the United States, if you look at whose responsible for capital punishment actually killing prisoners () what percentage of the population believes that, and actually does it?"
Believes that-? Believes in capital punishment!
yeah that you should execute somebody and how many of those people actually do it
likee its not even like 1/10 or 1 percent
so when they talk about canibalism or, ah, that was only the prieest doing that, which is what percentage of the population is the priest? So im not sayng it didnt happen, ut it wasnt rampant, 
that was a ritual
yes
i mean what
and what do youthink that form the evidence ive seen both at teotihuacan an tenocthitlan that you know human sacrifices, its been missconstrued in the sense that it was from what ive seen a political tool more than anything else
you have to demonize your enemies
yeah
you have too
well there is that but hteres is also if you are an impare and ah any state, () 
right
very clearly kill those people you could argue that man of our wars are a form of sacrifice () its power, and that the aztec empire is no different but inviting the people from other-, the kings of Tlaxcala to come and watch their prisoners being sacrificed and the party was a way to say "hey look! we cancrush you in any moment  we wont do" so it was a political tool ah- from what i ive rread
Right
and a lot of of of-, folks I dont wanna say, first () you know, mexican or mexcan americam, but a lot of fols theyre not aware of ah of how many codices were distroyed by mexica rules befre spaniards ever set foot, because, they wanted to-, they didnt have a simbology or methodology, that so they used the toltec, it was based on the toltec, so they destroyed a lot of ther own codices did u know this?
i didnt
yea, ill send you the information on it.
this is before spanish ever set foot because theyre trying to change their, their-, the. their arch,right
oh yeah
you know, when they we were this, yyou know we were just (laughs)
so all of this stuff is just
but the music-
the music which we dont know what it sounded like but the music was music as ritual, i mean, theres, theres music th-the, () about them playing music when Moctezuma is eating then he said he ate between 4 and 6 hours so theres music being going on all while this is happening ah
theres also documentation of ah-, when he brought them back to spain, ah, the mexica people to spain, ah, there's you know the world was invited to see this, so theres writing in french belgium german about what they saw and theyre coming from eintirely different perspective, cause its like they had these noseplugs and thes ears plugs they had this tatoos, a very different perspective, they had no-, nothing to compare to, you know,
so, ah
their observatiosna are interesting too
but the thing is how many sacrifices were doing daily is also another issue
were doing what?
how many sacrifices they were doing daily?
oh yeah
but the thing about the war-
yeah all the ()
the thing about the wolfare is the same thing you can read if you ever read () if you ever read that by dee brown and then the history between 1860 and 1890 of the native american whatever the border is now, they talk aot, they were not used to shooting like they- like they never had a 100 archers released at the same time, thats not what they did, and then you can see find them saying "maybe if we had learned to do that we would have mkilled more people at one time" the native people saying on this side of the border, 
oh yea
and its the same thing there because they were ot used to, you didnt kill a people on the field, you should do the person 
captured
be brought tobe sacrifficed
yeah
so this concept of shooting the person wit an arrow was not like a heroic thing
yeah
or other thing, and the the you became a knivhgt by how many people you brougt back-, thehire the knowht the more people you brought back soits a very different perspective for warfary then, you know,
But at the end o the ()every 
well theyre dead by
i mean every parent, no every parent, s on the sea self of destruction
the one happen when () the rome, happen with mexicas and probably with the mayans, the way the mayans disappeard
well they didnt dissapeared they just moved north
i mean. they move- and that was an increase that are the mexicans are mayans, and then it change the things according to the political thing to being in ower
you know Michael Carl, right?
Ajam!
Ok, So michael Cuddle hes like recently, recently in the last few years hes like i would much rather be captured and tortured by a mexican warrior than by a mayan warrior" 
oh yeah?
yeah! He said "ou know, there theyre, the level of
salvajes
the level of torture and howthey torture is a stounding () compared to the mexican people, he says michael caw, 
and he says ah you would find the-
cause i didnt know michael caw, i mean, i i knew michael caws work and i had see his interview especificaly about it specific object but i hadnever seen him intervieed, have you ever seen him interviewed? 
No
Oh my god! this guy is very, god bless you Michael caw, he's very- ah, theyre talkig to him and he says ah, I'll tell you im paraprasing but you can look it up ill show it ill send it to you its on audio video interview he says a "u know this countries on the UN represented at the UN, in africa, that have 100 thousand 200 thousand people, that means they have funding and protected by the UN" He goes "theres like 6 million mayan people tht donthave a seat on the UN because they're nt in one country"
Uhum
they are all over the place, he says, so they have no representation at all, the indigenous at all, at alll! He goes they have no protection, they have no noodys protec- thats why the rain forest- thats why you see al this stuff, but hes very (claps) like this, and then you find out hes ex cIA, michael caw i didnt know he was x CIA, so he knows, hes like you know "this people need to be protected", "this people", "this people", he's very tulet which i had no idea he was, (aughs) but its very funny to hear him talk that way ause he gets really emotional about it
uhum
but heay, cause hes like 84 or 85 nw
yeah
and i met Dr. Stevenson, at UCLA
Yeah
i used to lecture there I nevertook a photo of him
whats your impression of him?
I can tell you what he said, he said, ah, we would go there for lunch, did u meet him?
I didnt meet him, he passed away before i got there
we, we would go to the loso the /) to get a lunch and its like hed sit there and steve would say, ah, oh Dr Stevenson he just gave a lecture on indigeous instruments he goes "where at?" and then hes (laugh) "Where?" so he would always sit in the chair and a suit, he always had a suit no matter what day time and- he was there in that suit in that chair
so he gets see everyody walk in ()
hes like "what did you do?"
()
"they need to shut down the school and every human being on the campus should be sending there, and you should be in the largest hall, and everybody sgould be listening to-""
that was that was Dr. Stevenso and he was like that, he was like 93 or something, 90, for 3 yearas i saw him, he always said  this same thing "they should be shutting down the school, everybody should wear this ()" always very funny very sweet, but he was, he was old, he was old
yeah! 
He was quite a character
and you know he's written, youve seen his books, right?not just his.. all the books hes done
oh yea! all of the books
and theres other stories that i cannot share with you that i wish i could () but ahm., one day maybe, but ah-, yeah
So! 
yea!
once again, those two guys, ah, luis PErez xonestli and Ramiro, now Ramiro you understand () who they are
yeah
Tge ()
yeah, al the new () Zepeda, Luis () within one year, 
Are they in () 
are they what?
Are they in ()
are they what?
Are they in tribu, right?
oh no! Give me your order!
Antonio Zepeda first, first guy everybody knows, Luis PERez Ix. within a year, few months, both of this guys had made multip- like 30 recordings that i know of each guy, 
yeah, 
over the-, 
yeah
just them, 
So these two guys, tribu, 5 gentlemen, Agustin Pimentel, leads that group, ah, Ramiro Ramirez was the last new person in tribu, meaning he joined in 1980 (laughs) I believe 1980 and he just left like 3 years ago just because they dont play that much and he needs to have an income so he plays by himself now
so he played with me
we played together at CAl art and we played at LA CC, and hes otomi, ah and I played with luis seeveral times, but those are the only guys i can tell you, those guys have not played with anybody from here, and i dont know why theyd play with me but htey havent played with anybody from here 
yeah
you can ask those guys and see what they say, they probably dont wanna talk about it
yeah
but, and then the only, and ah, ah., i dont remember if Ramiro speaks indigenous otomi, do you remember if he does?
No ()
I dont know if he does, but Luis does. 
yeah
and luis has ah the good thing about luis is hes definitively been around and () the coolthing that hes doing now, to me, is that when they started this documentary on him, the guy didnt really have a-, didnt know how to frame him, you know, how do you frame this guy
whos making the documentary
oh yea
who is making it?
oh, he's ah i dont-, ill send it to you i dont remember his name hes out on ny
but what they did is they wen to ah, they went to 
so if he visitd the maria (), right? Theres icture you know who that is?
No
shes a cult-, for lack of a better word, shes a cultural icon in mexico, she's the first person to do mushrooms, before LSD was known in theUS people were going to her before they found lsd and she would take you to  ah, a trip for a week to 2 weeks and () all these guys efore they did the LSD thing, so ah, theres picture of Luis () so, so what he did he was, they filmed him going back now 30 years later and with her children and her grandchildren and saying you know, "your-, your grandmother gave me this drum, and she taught me this song doyou know it" "no " and then they filmed him playing the song she taught him that they dont even know anymore, so hes going back to all the places he visited and showing them the instruments  "your grand give me this " she showed me this sog
oh its so cool
so theyre showing like this big arch of his life you know which is amazing, but he was there! so like
cause theres a lot of people that say "ah! That guy! that guy"
is like you know what? Im sorry but you are not-, you dont have that experience, and you dont speak any indigenous languages and he still lives there
Where does he live tho?
mexico city
and hes 68 now
hes not really old either, 
so im sorry i didnt finisg, theres these 2 guys in terms of aging and then tribu, and then Jorge reyes, jorge reyes was the youngest of this arch f people, of this two guys in the bottom () like 8 years ago
so now theres this big, theres the-
so this guys have 30 years of recordings  each of these guys, so theres 90 recordings, and theres
(Drum)
theres this big () this gig gap in mexico right now in terms of whos ggonna keep that alive
but the people listen to the border who are making stuff or maybe not as many as mexico ritgh now
say again
theres more eope making music in this side of the border fewer in mexico then right now?
no, what im saying is that 
there 8) still exists in MExico but theres nobody to take it over
from grupo tribu
from... 89
ok
all these guys are still alive
no, people are aware of them and and, and, how do you? i dont know hw to say this: well the one thing, they dont have that experience
you know its one thing to taught to somebody whos been all over, and learn from them but youre ont them
so itts like i dont do anything that luis does, you know, i mean, ive played with him, you know, he plays with me same thing with ramiro but i dont replicate anythingthat he does, hes fine with that
()
Im the first person he started working with and im in this side of the border for whatever reason, i cant tell you i dont know you have to ask them
() going down a lot then
no he actually comes here, when ive been down there he hasnt
it-, it-,  took like 3 years of us corresponding before we actually met
yes
cause when he was here i was in europe or, we just never, the stars never met, then one day they just met and then he we we ke he we were both here for one day in the United states, and thats the day we met, because we were both leaving the next day and we met here and then ah he said "we're gonna do something i dont know what but were gonna do somethin" () whenever he comes
thats cool
and RAmiro first time last year, but hes wonderful
theyre both guys theyre polar opposites in terms of personality right?
yeah
laughs
completely
completelydifferent human beings
yeah luis plays most of the we weere talking about more ritual music
yeah
indigenous
(57:30)
and he dress up like., i dont know
he scares people!
he scare people
Luis1
luis yeah
luis scares people, I mean
and that guy the walking dead. 8laughs
ah'
all this dark and also when he plays ah, he starts doing like hes doing a witchcraft thing like hes a curandero, hes doing it right there to the people between their siitting andtalking and
ill send you some film
hes very is like he creates an atmosphere or, thers no, no scary, at for me, that was scare
laughs
but for people that yo know they watch this movie the wakkingd dead stuff () actually laughs
when he comes out, ill send it to you youll see what im talking about casue a lot of people () this is not danza
this is not
this is not what it supposed to be
no, its nothing to do
its kind of the entire arch
he kbws all tee diferent people
he makes more sounds
with the when he plays instruments, the meodies, more sounds and more, and also ah gutural sounds
ok
they imitates birds
he can sound like he cansound like animal an stuff
animals
and the people the people really () laughs
yeah, he goes  (imitates gutural sound) and then the music and, but you know the the the nstrumetns are beautiful that he uses dor that
but hes very animated, yoyu know when hes on stage, hell move, and a lot of times wa thell do is hell become the stella,  like the image you see 
yeah
into that image, hell freze frame in that image and its like you reallize all thats... thats what it is? So hell be
but lately hes just acting like a (9) scary, y know) and the way he dresses now, you dont know what to expect, and the music, and the darkness, its very different, i dont know, but he also used to play in the cirque du soleil
in the 80s
and hes very versatil, hes all this music, and in spanish, you know, and all this influences
yeah
you know, besides, the- indigenous
hes definitely more different than anybody that does this stuff
yeah
a lot of the other guys are more
i dont wanna say traditional ()
traditional leader but theres 5 bodies on stage so theres a lot of sound yeah
and () danzantes ()
yeah, a lot of these guys
a lit if thes guys do not
Like ()
they do not even, they wont even- im just
yeah
they just dont speak to danzantes
yeah
cause they fell like its ah-. a  that its not what it was, like the concept of the 4 directions, theres no documentation
but theres people here that would never do anything
(1:00:25)